Hello OddLots listeners. This is Carmen,
producer of the show, here to tell you
that we're recording the show live at
the Untitled Supper Club in Chicago on
September 25th. Check out the show notes
for a link to purchase tickets or go to
bloomberg.com/odlots.
Hope to see you there.
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLots podcast. I'm Jill Weisenthal
>> and I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, did you catch any of the clips
from the big uh Chinese military parade?
>> I did. I did. So, this was the This is
actually really good timing. So, we're
recording this.
>> They really know how to put on a parade.
They really know how to put on a
military parade.
>> We're recording this on September 4th.
Uh we just had a massive military parade
in Beijing that Xiinping put on. This
was while Putin was there and also Kim
Jong-un. And there were tanks, there
were helicopters, there were lots and
lots of drones, nuclear capable
missiles.
>> There were robot dogs.
>> Robot wolves. Oh,
>> much more sinister. There were also
80,000 doves to mark uh China's victory
in World War II. And I have to say, when
I first saw that, I was reading a
translation of the parade and it said
80,000 pigeons. And I thought like, wait
a second, are we bringing back carrier
pigeons for military use or what? But
it's 80,000 symbolic doves.
>> So, you're of the view that China won
World War II? No, that's a joke. I don't
want to I'm not interested in
>> Is that what the episode's
>> I'm not interested in getting into
debates about attribute. That's actually
I'm not that interested in that topic. I
feel like that would be a big diversion.
But yes, whenever I see the I don't know
I don't know anything about weapons. I'm
like a bad man in that respect. No, I
feel I'm
>> What happened to all the military
history books you're reading? I guess
those are outdated weapons.
>> I'm interested in like sort of the
economics of the politics, but when I
see people posting about, oh wow, this
is a fourth gen hypersonic whatever I
like I have no idea. It's probably like
what some people think about when you
and I post about, you know, the UK 210
linkers spread or what something like
that.
>> You know, it means something.
>> You know, it also is like, okay, a lot
of people like to flex their knowledge
at time. Again, a lot of men on the
internet like to flex their knowledge
about stuff like that.
>> Everyone wants to be an armchair
military strategist or procurement
specialist.
>> All that being said, there are a couple
things that I'm interested in. one is
sort of did the military parade tell us
anything new about the state-of-the-art
of Chinese military technology but also
you know of course several months ago
there was a sort of brief conflict
between India and Pakistan that was sort
of I believe earlier in the summer or
late spring and there were battles
between fighter jets and for a moment
there was a lot of question about did
this reveal something about the
state-of-the-art of who has the best air
force who has the best air force
technology and everyone was like pouring
over the data to see what we learned.
And so it is a good time to maybe get a
temperature check on some of these
questions about who has the best weapons
and the concerns or the anxiety in DC
about where we stand, where our allies
stand and so forth. Lots of interesting
questions being raised right now,
>> right? And there's clearly a lot of
angst about the US's position in terms
of military power right now. Totally. I
gotta say when it comes to India
Pakistan everything I know about India
Pakistan um air force tensions comes
from the Bollywood movie Verzara. Have
you ever seen that?
>> So basically I don't know a lot but it's
a great movie. It actually really
encapsulates like Pakistan India
relations quite well. But anyway we
should do a screening.
>> Yeah. There we go. Okay.
>> Okay. Well I'm really excited to say we
have someone who knows about this much
more than the two of us. We literally
have the perfect guest. Someone we've
wanted to talk to for a long time. Kelly
Grio, senior fellow at the Stimson
Center. So, Kelly, thank you so much for
coming on OddLots.
>> Hi, thank you for having me.
>> Let's start with the parade. Anything
strike you there?
>> You know, I think as an aviation geek, I
was a little disappointed uh because we
didn't really see any new aircraft.
There were some uh support aircraft,
enabling aircraft they displayed. I was
really hoping we might see their new
sixth generation bomber, the H20, but
they didn't give us preview of that or
the aircraft, you know, the sixth gen
fighters that we had seen earlier in
this past year. So, it was sort of the,
you know, the J20 that their fifth gen
was certainly flying. I'd say the
biggest takeaway though for me that I
was thinking about what would a US
military parade look like and how would
that compare to a Chinese military
parade?
>> And what really struck me was actually
the number of unmanned systems, the
drones. I don't think you would see that
in an American parade uh to the same
degree. And also just the variety of
types of drones. You know, if you were
having the Air Force do a parade and you
said, "Okay, you have to come out with,
you know, your drones." We would see
really high-end capabilities that look
more like fighter aircraft. And we might
see some of the smaller drones, but
really not anything in between as much.
And that's the space where China is
clearly developing that in between space
in particular to have a lot of options
and variety.
>> Yeah. So, one of the things we did see
was a new like unmanned air vehicle. I
think it was called like loyal wingman
or something like that. It does seem
that China is putting more emphasis on I
guess like a sort of holistic approach
to its air capabilities where like maybe
some of the traditional aircraft are
basically playing support roles for
drones and vice versa. Is that the
direction that they seem to be going in?
Yeah, I think that is actually a fair
conclusion to say which given the
emphasis they placed on drones and and
that word these days is almost it's
really useful and in some ways it's not.
It means different things to different
people but I'm going to use it just to
mean that there's not a human being
inside the platform. Uh so we saw you
know cross domains the air domain the
sea domain the land domain lots of these
kinds of drones and it does seem that
they're moving towards a model where
they lead with the drones and the human
beings are more in a role of enabling
that as opposed to perhaps the drones
helping to support or enable the human
beings that are operating and so that is
quite a different model potentially.
Joe, uh, there's one thing we should say
before we go any further, which is I
know European defense stocks have gotten
all the attention this year, but
actually if you look at Chinese defense
stocks, they went absolutely crazy. So,
pull up, I wrote this down earlier. Pull
up Avic Changdu Aircraft.
>> Okay, I'm looking at the chart.
>> That had a massive runup this year. It's
come down basically since the military
parade, but it's still up like 15% year
to date. And in general, Chinese defense
stocks have been outperforming the
broader market. So you can see people
are getting excited about defense.
>> In uh January 2023, this was a $10 UN
stock. Now it's at 83. So yeah, it's not
just Europe that's rallying. You
mentioned your disappointment. What was
it? The sixth gen plane that they didn't
show. What do these things mean? I see
this. Oh, they're unveiling their fifth
gen plane, their sixth gen plane. Where
where are Jensen's generations? Are they
comparable? Are they like for like? Are
these useful terms? Talk to us about
what these terms mean and how you
understand them or how you state them.
>> Yeah, so this is a great question. You
know, we talk a lot about generations.
I'd like to think that, you know, say
that these are scientific terms that are
used with these very clear criteria. The
reality is that's not entirely the case
and people will even disagree about what
aircraft whether it belongs in you know
fifth gen or fourth gen or but what
basically what we try to do with the
generational term is group aircraft
together where it seems like there's
some leap or or magnitude difference in
terms of the kinds of capabilities it
has. So if you look at fourth gen, which
was developed mostly in the 70s, it was
really the emphasis was on
maneuverability and being able to
dogfight. Whereas when you get to the
fifth gen, this is when we see stealth.
The aircraft that look much more
futuristic. The weapon bays are internal
to try to help with that stealth. And
then we also see the start of really
these turning into much more computer
based systems with sensors and trying to
integrate some of these sensors. That's
where like the F-35, the F-22 come in.
And now the reality is those aircraft
were developed say 20 years ago. We're
now moving into the sixth generation,
which is a continuation of the stealth.
And I'll just say there's two really
defining features for sixthg gen. One is
that it's tailless. Um it doesn't have a
vertical tail to again improve with that
stealth, also help with range. And then
the other part of it is something that
you mentioned earlier, which is this
loyal wingman concept that it won't just
be a manned fighter, you know, with a
human inside, but that it will also be
cooperating with these really high-end
drones that are capable of operating
either alongside it or ahead of it.
>> By the way, Tracy, I have to say I'm not
totally surprised that there is not nice
definitions of various gen. And the only
reason I say that is because based on
our semiconductor episodes, you can't
even get consistent definitions of like
what is a four nanometer. And so if you
can't even get an agreed upon definition
of what is the sort of nanometer size in
a chip, I'm not surprised that there is
not agreed upon definitions of things
more vague like a generation of aircraft
technology.
>> Absolutely. On this note, when it comes
to developing new aircraft, is it mostly
an iterative process? Like we just
improve upon the existing technology and
I guess like what's the catalyst or the
decision that goes into you know what,
we're going to scrap this existing
design. and it's no longer useful or
whatever and we're going to start
something entirely new.
>> Yeah, those are great questions uh ones
the Air Force itself is often wrestling
with. I would just say one thing that
you asked about is this sort of
iterative improvements on technology and
the answer to that when it comes to
fighter aircraft and bombers is yes.
>> I was thinking about this you know
preparing for this podcast and thinking
about the historical development of
fighter aircraft and you go back and
look it really hasn't in some sense it
hasn't changed that much. you know, the
missions that these aircraft were doing
in World War I and World War II, you
know, trying to clear the airspace of
other aircraft, trying to support, you
know, ground forces or or service forces
through attacks on the ground delivering
effects. That hasn't really changed. The
missions haven't really changed for
these aircraft. And, you know, once you
get to, you know, certainly, you know,
second, third generation, they start to
look like fighter modern fighter
aircraft to the naked eye. And so, each
generation is improving in some way
iteratively. uh the technology this is
evolution not revolution in terms of the
technological developments even things
like stealth right we see that as you
know often revolutionary but it's really
an improvement on the existing
technology and because it's evolution
and not revolution in terms of
capabilities that are being added
there's marginal gains so the more
you're trying to improve this existing
technology and sort of extend this ex
existing technology the costlier it's
becoming but you're getting perhaps less
in terms in terms of the actual
capabilities that you're gaining each
time. So it's becoming more and more
expensive to create a new generation
with more fancy tech. And then that
raises the question you their second
question which is when do you decide
okay it's worth investing in a new
aircraft with new technology versus
trying to extend existing aircraft. You
know, there was talk, for example, of
taking US fifth generation aircraft like
the F-35, the F-22, and pairing those
with these, you know, high-end drones
that are called collaborative combat
aircraft, pairing them together to this
manned, unmanned teaming, or do you
really need a whole new manned fighter
aircraft to operate alongside those? Is
it worth the investment? And so those
are hard choices in terms of what you
really think you're gaining in terms of
capability with a new aircraft versus
trying to sustain what you have in terms
of maintenance costs and the ability to
upgrade those systems.
>> So obviously we don't know that much
about the sixth gen jet in China. I know
there were like a few clips that were on
the internet several months ago and
people like yourself tried to divine as
much as you could based on a few seconds
of video and I'm sure you learned
something. Although to the naked eye was
like looks like a plane to me. Don't you
just love though that the Chinese just
happen to be, you know, flying over
cities?
>> Yeah. Yeah. But where do we stand here?
Like from the you inside the Pentagon or
at the Air Force, etc. And they see
those same videos and they know where
we're at. What do people feel about
where the US stands in comparison to
China right now in terms of our cutting
edge versus their cutting edge?
>> Yeah. So, you know, I think the truth is
that you get different answers from
different people and sometimes I think
that might also reflect different
interests that they have um in the
development of sixthg gen aircraft. Just
as a caveat, let me just say that the
Chinese actually demonstrated what
looked like two sixth gen aircraft um in
late December to mark Mao's uh birthday.
You know, one that looks like it might
be more of a a fighter bomber was much
larger, the J36, and another that looks
more like a tra, you know, a fighter
aircraft in terms of size and things.
the J what people are calling the J50.
We don't know a lot about those
aircraft. My guess is that they were
demonstrator aircraft, not things that
are operational in production that
they're very early in their flight
process and testing. You know, you heard
a lot of people saying, "Oh, look, see,
we're behind. They're flying these
aircraft already, the sixth gen." But
the reality is the United States has
been flying sixth gen, what we know
about since at least 2020, its own
demonstrator aircraft. So, I don't think
the United States is actually behind in
terms of sixthgen technology. Um, same
thing with the collaborative combat
aircraft, the drone portion. I think
we're actually ahead in that probably
against China. On the exquisite side of
things, the United States, I think, is
ahead of China. And certainly, there was
already a discussion happening about
whether to proceed with a sixth gen Air
Force aircraft, a fighter aircraft,
which is now called the F-47. Uh, China
flew it around the time that that
decision was being made. The Trump
administration decided to go ahead with
it. So we're continuing with the
development of our own sixthg gen
fighter aircraft. We already have a
sixthg gen bomber the B-21. So we're
ahead of the Chinese certainly there. So
I don't think we're certainly behind.
The issue might be it's not necessarily
who gets there first um in terms of
sixthgen but who's able to really scale
up and I think that's when we maybe
should be a little bit more concerned
about China is their ability to scale
might be quite greater.
[Music]
Tracy, there's this very good book um uh
Wages of Destruction. Oh god. No, but it
really
>> I thought you were going to say Moby
Dick for a second.
>> You never know which one I'm going to
throw at you of the three books that
I've read in my entire life.
>> Wait, what's the third one?
>> I don't know. Orality and Literacy by
Walter Ang.
>> Oh, yeah. You do bring that up a lot. Uh
but wars are won obviously partly on the
advanced tech but also on just the
ability to produce at scale which is of
course a major concern here.
>> Well wait does that actually apply to
fighter jets? So, does quantity matter
in air combat in the sense that, you
know, if I have like a 100 MiG 21s or
something really outdated? Can I
actually succeed against like one F47,
the new like next generation fighter
jet?
>> Yeah. So, this is something the United
States again has debated for a long
time. Um, if we go back to the Cold War
and the Soviets and we were facing an
enemy that had a quantitative advantage,
they were just able to produce more
numbers, more people. And one of the
things the United States decided to do
is develop what's called an offset
strategy. And it did try to gain an
advantage through quality, a quality
advantage in terms of the technology to
make up for the lack of numbers. And so
to some extent, yes, you can do that.
But there comes a point in which you
can't make up for a lack of simple mass
and numbers. You know, one of the
challenges I would just say is against
China is they may have a sufficient
quality and quantity, right? that you
know it's a little bit of a different
kind of adversary in that way. But in
just in terms of how much you can make
up for it, I think there are a couple
things that are specific as well to the
Indo Pacific theater that make it harder
to operate with a smaller number of
exquisite high-end platforms even if
they're enormously capable. I would say
one is just simply that air warfare
itself has changed. And so particularly
with the sensors that are now available,
you know, in all kinds of domains to be
able to look for these aircraft and try
to find them, you know, the threat
environment has changed and that having
a small number of very expensive
aircraft is inherently kind of fragile
because if you start losing some of
these, you start attritting significant
amounts of capability very quickly. and
with the kinds of sensors and the kind
of surfaceto-air missiles, air defense
systems that China's developed, that
kind of threat environment, that's more
likely to happen. So that's one. And
then the second I would just say is that
an aircraft cannot be in two places at
once. I know that seems pretty obvious,
but in the Indoacific, this really
matters because of the ranges we're
talking about.
>> You know, fighter aircraft were
originally developed for the European
theater, and you see that reflected in
the kinds of ranges. So they have a
range often of around like on average
about 600 nautical miles without aerial
refueling. That works great in Europe
because there are plenty of airfields
you can land at backup airfields and to
be able to, you know, even on the ground
get refueled in the Indo-Pacific. You
know, if you look at like a Taiwan uh
contingency potentially, you can maybe
operate fighters from say Okinawa, US
fighters from Okinawa without aerial
refueling. even if you were to operate
them from other places in Japan, the
main island of Japan, you would need
aerial refueling in order to be able to
get to the theater of operations in
return. And so when you need that kind
of aerial refueling capability, but you
also have are traveling these longer
distances, it means you can't do as many
uh sorties every day or limited number
of sorties. You need more aircraft just
to be able to even create some kind of
consistent presence in the area of
operations. Uh so you know mass does
matter in certain ways and this is I
think something we're seeing you know in
Ukraine you know we've seen it I think
even in the Middle East and kind of a
return back to that time when you know
industrial scale matters particularly in
great power conflicts.
>> That makes sense. Can I ask, this is a
slightly personal question, but since
Joe mentioned at the beginning of this
conversation how much men like to sit
around and talk about military strategy,
it actually reminded me. So,
occasionally when I visit my dad, I am
forced to go to the American Legion Club
and there are a lot of old guys there
talking about Air Force and other
military things. And one thing that
always comes up is this idea of air
superiority. And I never really know
quite what they mean because it just
sounds like okay if you're if you have
air superiority then you're going to win
but my understanding is it's something
like much more subtle than that like
something that actually comes on a range
even though it sounds very binary. What
is it? What's air superiority?
>> Yeah. Well, let me first just say if air
superiority allowed you to win wars then
you know the Taliban should not be in
power in Afghanistan.
>> We would have had a we would have had a
cakewalk in Vietnam too.
>> Yeah. Exactly. um if only we're so
simple. But um so air superiority so I
think first I would just say is to start
with the term air control which is this
idea that what degree are you able to
actually control the airspace to be able
to on the one hand use it access it
yourself and use it militarily but also
to deny the adversary the ability to
access and control the airspace. And so
if you think about that air control,
there is a spectrum as you said of
degrees of air control and you know it
can be completely contested and neither
side has it. It's you know mutual air
denial. Neither side is really able to
exploit access the airspace or deny the
other side the ability to access it or
air superiority is a higher degree of
control. And the way it's defined as
it's usually time bounded in terms of
area and the amount of time you're able
to have a degree of control, but you're
able to operate conduct operations
without prohibitive interference from
the adversary. Uh so you're able to
basically do what you want with the
airspace generating effects, you know,
on the ground to support, you know, the
joint force without the adversary being
able to unduly interfere in your
operations. And you know, that's pretty
subjective criteria. I would just note
>> whereas you know there's a degree beyond
air superiority which is actually air
supremacy
>> and which is something I would argue the
United States has had by and large you
know the last 20 years it's been air
supremacy which is effectively you are
the only actor really operating in the
airspace the adversary you know is not
able to really bother you at all um in
terms of the airspace and it's a
essentially a permanent condition the
United States ruled the skies over
Afghanistan over Iraq during those wars
it was really more air supremacy, which
is, and I'll just say we've gotten very
used to it, but it's actually an
historical anomaly. That's really not
the reality. We've usually had to fight
for air superiority even, and including
against Vietnam. Um, particularly over
North Vietnam. It was a really quite uh
back and forth in terms of air
superiority and fighting for air
control.
>> So, this might be actually a good time
to pivot a little bit to the recent
conflict. I guess it was in May where we
saw Indian and Pakistani air force the
air forces shoot at each other. What did
we learn? This wasn't a dog fight in the
sort of classical sense but it was in a
situation which is seems to be fairly
rare in modern times in which we had
competing air forces shooting at each
other in the sky. So why don't you talk
to us a little bit big picture maybe
then we'll drill down about who um backs
either side in terms of where they get
their planes and what we learned what
kind of data we amassed from that
period.
>> Yeah. So you know it is unusual to see
two essentially modern air forces
attacking each other or fighting each
other having some kind of exchange um
particularly an air to you know also an
air-to-air exchange as well as
groundtoair. So you know the Indians
were operating kind of a mix of you know
some French aircraft some you know
Russian aircraft whereas on the other
side we had the Pakistanis were it seems
using Chinese aircraft um older Chinese
aircraft the J10 and also Chinese
missiles they were using something
called the PL-15 it's an export version
so it's not quite as good as the what
the the Chinese operate as a PL15 but
it's interesting and I think surprising
to many people because it is clear that
in this exchange that kind of happened
almost like western style um you know
they're meeting towards at the border
what was surprising to think to many
people is that it's clear that Indians
lost some aircraft and it's still
debated how many aircraft what type of
aircraft but you know there is some
photographic evidence to suggest they
lost some aircraft and I think that
surprised people to see that they did
lose these aircraft and you know
certainly you know both sides you know
engaged use this as you know as part of
their you know narrative right But we
got to see the PL-15, you know, in
action, this missile for the first time
and also see these Chinese fighters. And
I think it just surprised people to see
that the Pakistanis were successful in
the sense of actually achieving some
kills.
>> You know, you mentioned India having
some Russian aircraft and that reminded
me of another question that I wanted to
ask you, which is, you know, India still
famously flies MiG21s, aka the flying
coffin, although I think they're about
to retire them. So this is also good
timing for this particular discussion.
But how do countries make the decision
to I guess buy aircraft from other
places rather than try to develop their
own industry because I think India isn't
even planning to replace the MIGs with
something homegrown. It's going to buy
something from France. So why do
countries choose to do that?
>> Yeah. So this is a great question. Air
power from the beginning has been very
expensive to have an air force to have a
major air force because it's not even
just the fighter aircraft that you need
to develop. You need to develop all the
other supporting aircraft things like
Awax airborne warning and control
systems aerial refueling potentially is
you know intelligence surveillance
reconnaissance aircraft. So it's a whole
group of aircraft and then being able to
maintain them and then develop that
whole industrial scientific base. It's
it's a actually significant barriers
just in terms of the scientific
industrial base, the scientists, the
engineers, the materials that you need
to collect, the secure supply chain. So
there's a lot of barriers to entry in
terms of developing your own indigenous
aircraft. One of the options and these
aircraft themselves are quite expensive
to develop is to develop you know is to
buy it from another country whether that
can be Russia or China or the United
States or the French you know even the
South Koreans now. So that it can be an
attractive option because you avoid a
lot of those startup costs and the price
point might actually be lower than de
developing your it's likely to be lower
than developing your own indigenous
system in part because unless you're
able to export that indigenous system to
others it's going to really drive up the
cost the per unit cost for yourself. Um
so like even the United States the F-35
for example our cost isn't is dependent
what we pay for it for the US military
is dependent on our ability to sell it
to others. Um, it helps drive down the
perunit cost.
[Music]
When we think of civil aviation, there's
Boeing Airbus and then there's the
Brazilian one, Ember Air, and then of
course people are interested in what's
going to happen with COMAC, but that's
about it, right? There's two and a half
to maybe three, whatever, maybe four
potential players in this space that are
of any scale. It does seem as though
when it comes to military aircraft that
the geographic range of production is
much wider.
>> I mean, in terms of geographic range,
yes, I would say that is true. Um, like
the Turk Turkey is now
>> Yeah, the Turks that's what I that's
where I was getting I know I knew that
the Turkish had their own fighter jet,
etc. So it does seem as though countries
that aren't in the civil aviation game
at all are in the the military game.
>> Yes, they're you know they range in
terms of their quality. Um you know the
Swedes even with the Grippen that's a
great fighter aircraft. Um the Grippin
especially the price point. So it is a
competitive market in certain respects
in terms of in certainly in terms of
geographic range the number of countries
that are are you know have had
traditionally these kinds of industries
and continue to support them. And you
know, it's interesting that countries,
you know, to see the kinds of choices
they make about what kind of aircraft
they're going to purchase. Uh, you know,
often we're in competition with our own
allies for these contracts with others,
which I think is always interesting, you
know, with the French and, you know, the
Japanese joined a six-g project with the
Brits and and the Italians. So, it's
interesting that we're competing with
our own allies often for, you know,
other countries contracts. Since I
mentioned civil aviation, obviously we
all we all know about the troubles at
Boeing and the door flies off or
whatever and it's been one thing after
another. It seems like it's been a few
months, knock on wood, since we've had a
Boeing.
>> You you you probably just jinxed it.
>> Yeah, I hope not. But I don't, you know,
I don't follow the goings on on the
defense side of the American aviation
industry does not garner nearly the same
headlines or the same types of
headlines, etc. But if you just take it
in isolation, if you were to look at
Loheed Martin over the last several
years, how well is it operating as a
company as far as we can tell in terms
of its ability to ramp output at scale
and to continue to produce highquality
goods at scale?
>> Yeah. So if we're talking specifically
the defense industry in the United
States in general, I'd say scale is a
real problem. You know, one of the
things about the US preference often for
exquisite systems means exquisite
systems with lots of components, you
know, and these are technologically
complex and it's really hard for us to
ramp up production of these things. It's
been much easier to ramp up production
of artillery, for example, as opposed to
the Patriot system and and and that just
simply has to do with the reality of the
complexity and and concerns and also
some challenges around uh supply chain
bottlenecks. Yeah, this is what I wanted
to ask. So there have been production
problems with like the nextg F47
famously, right, which is being
developed by Boeing. How much does the
sort of ecosystem of supply chains and
component manufacturers matter when
you're making new military aircraft and
trying to, you know, do something that's
cutting edge
>> a lot. Uh, you know, I would just say if
you look at the F-35, the fifth gen
fighter that the United States operates,
it's had a very troubled history. It has
been constantly delayed and cost
overruns have been extraordinary for
that aircraft and it's had a lot of
difficulties even in the upgrades. And
there was just another um I think it was
a a Congressional Budget Office study
talking about um the challenges related
to there's supposed to be a series of
upgrades that are being done and it
looks like they're going to be delayed
and some of that is related to problems
with supplies. Even when we were talking
around tariffs, you might remember uh
with the um Chinese and they put these
um export controls on some of the rare
earth minerals. Believe it or not, some
of those rare earth minerals are things
that we actually use in our fighter
aircraft. uh that China has you know the
majority of the refining capacity. So
trying to make this with a secure supply
chain including the materials in
particular is a challenge and one that
you know I think there's bipartisan
support right now for trying to address
this issue. But it's not one I would
just say that I think the United States
can address alone. I think it's going to
require you know other allies and
partners to try to create that ecosystem
but in a way that's more secure.
One of the things that has come up on
the few times we've talked about the
defense industry is it's very spread out
because obviously these big players like
to have a little a little employment in
almost every congressional district or
at least every state for obvious reasons
that need no explation. Does this create
diseconomies of scale though spreading
out of the supply chain for no economic
reason? Yeah, I mean one of the things
it certainly does and we see this in the
case of the famed A-10. Um the A-10 is
an attack aircraft that's used for in a
close air support role is that the Air
Force I don't know how many times now it
has tried to retire the A-10 arguing
that it's not likely to be survivable in
a future war um because it is quite
vulnerable to especially groundbased
threats. And every time it's tried to
retire it, there's always someone in in
Congress that is upset about that
because their district has A10s and
wants to see it to, you know, the
program continue. Um, it looks like
they're going to finally be successful
in that retirement. But the spreading
out of these programs to the districts
has often made it much harder to
actually end programs when they need to
be ended so that you can actually
develop new capabilities. I think that's
one of one of the really big challenges.
And the other I would just say is also
is just the fact that we have the
concentration of the market around these
primes. These firms are longstanding. Um
you know they're well-developed but I
think to have a really vibrant defense
industrial base particularly in terms of
innovation. You need a lot more players
and it's much harder for these smaller
defense startups to get into the market
to survive in the market and not be
squeezed out by the primes. you know
there's efforts to try to support them
in some ways to try to encourage that
but that's a real concern for me
particularly when I look at like the
drone space for example I don't see the
same kind of vibrancy commercial market
or the defense market around drones like
what we see in say China for example
>> so this is something that came up in our
conversation with the Palunteer CTO this
idea of like creating a more even
playing field I guess so that you do get
this network of like competing players
Just on the China note, can you compare
and contrast a little bit like China's
military manufacturing and development
capabilities and its again its ecosystem
of manufacturers versus the US like what
exactly are the key differences in your
in your mind? Yeah. So, I think there
are a couple differences is that their
capacity to scale up seems to be much
greater. And so, some of that is just
simply that they're able to turn things
out faster in terms of manufacturing.
Um, some of that is, you know, attention
that they've paid to manufacturing
capabilities and more advance, you know,
methods. That's certainly one, you know,
and they can get sufficient workers. I
mean they have a larger workforce to in
terms of attracting people into into the
factories to be able to make these
things. And there's also I think the
other difference is and you hear this a
lot from American defense industry firms
is that the lack of like consistent
orders. You know they don't want to
build these factories for example for
you know say we're talking Patriot
missiles build these additional
factories to produce these missiles so
that they're only doing it for a couple
years for the US military right that
would be highly inefficient. They want
to know that they're getting long-term
orders. And the US has not been as great
about being clear about the long-term
demand signal, whereas I think China has
been much more successful. And part of
that's just because of the nature of
their system to be able to send those
signals and work with, you know, what
are effectively state, you know,
somewhat private, somewhat stateowned,
uh, firms, supporting them through tax
breaks often and also placing much much
larger orders. In China, at least, you
know, you're always going to need
military products for uh for military
parades at least. There's always going
to be a parade.
>> But this is the way I mean, what you're
describing is essentially the I don't
know the malignant way in which the
defense industrial complex only grows
over time because you build these
factories and then there are people
there and you can't just turn them off
or because what if you're in a war and
so you just end up in this situation
where you have this beast that just
constantly needs to be fed. There is no
such thing as okay we have enough now
when it comes to a given weapon system.
>> Yeah. You know and I think one of the
other things is we tend to start with
the platform or the system we want to
develop and then we think about how are
we going to manufacture it
>> and I'm always struck by that quote by
Elon Musk where he says about I think
it's Tesla the factory is the product.
>> Yeah. And so I think one of the problems
is this the the mindset we have which is
like okay here's the platform here's
what we want it to have in capabilities
like this is the perfect system right
and then we think about manufacturing it
as opposed to saying listen this system
is only good to me if I'm going to be
able to scale it up and scale it up
rapidly and easily enough and that needs
to I think be much earlier in the
process and the company's showing that
like there's going to be that ability to
ramp up production u that's just not how
we've really approached it in part
because we've been accustomed to this
paradigm of smaller numbers of expensive
exquisite systems, but we now need a
good enough systems in larger numbers
and so that requires a different model.
>> Okay. Well, on this note, just to sum it
all up, how screwed is the US militarily
versus China?
>> You know, I don't think we are. You
know, first of all, military parades are
great. They're fun to watch, but it's a
quite a different thing to actually be
able to use this capability and and to
really, you know, have the skilled
personnel that can really operate it.
And I would just say, you know, this is
sort of the bean counting version of
parade where we get to see some cool
things. And we don't even really know
what that looks like inside today. When
you look at military capabilities, you
know, a lot of it's the computer part
and the sensors and and the integration
and that you can't really evaluate just
through images. And my faith is really
that I think the United States still
maintains an edge in those things and
certainly in well-trained personnel that
are able to use their equipment really
well compared to the Chinese. And so I
think, you know, we still maintain
certain advantages in terms of military
effectiveness over the Chinese. They
have certain advantages in terms of
their geography. But, you know, they're
certainly becoming a greater competitor.
But if we're trying to defend territory,
you know, in allied territory like
Japan, the Chinese still have a much
harder uh problem set of trying to
overturn, you know, the regional order.
Um, particularly with us on defense.
>> Kelly Grio, fantastic conversation.
Fantastic reminder to not always read
too much into grand propagandistic
parades. As impressive as they may as
they may be visually, fantastic
conversation. Thank you so much for
coming on Ala.
>> Thank you for having me.
[Music]
>> Tracy, I really thought that was a great
conversation. Just to start, I do think
one thing we should do more on is these
efforts to have defense startups because
you hear about it a lot, right? There
are a lot of people associated with the
Trump administration who are very
enthusiastic about the prospect of
Southern California tech startups like
an Anderil or whatever to be more
important contractors to the defense
department and so forth. To what degree
are these efforts successful? How hard
is it to sort of break the strangle hold
that a few large players have? Is an
interesting question, but one we should
definitely do more on.
>> I totally agree. The other two things
that kind of struck me from that
conversation was one, the idea that
quantity still matters when it comes to
military warfare. And as you pointed
out, like this is a longstanding theme
when it comes to conflict. Whoever can
make the most stuff or produce the most
soldiers tends to win.
>> Not always, but mostly. And then the
second thing that stood out to me was as
uh Kelly was saying at the end the
technological capabilities of competing
military forces and the idea that even
though we can see you know the shell of
a particular product we can look at like
whatever next generation fighter um
China is producing you can't see inside
of it. So it is really difficult to
evaluate things like sensor technology
or you know how they're targeting their
particular targets and things like that.
>> The only problem is just by going on
literally every other consumer industry
that we are aware of particular cars. I
mean this is or consumer drones right
>> just consumer drones. It looks like
they're doing pretty good.
>> Right. The signs aren't good for the US.
>> Yeah. I mean maybe we don't know what's
really inside some of these systems.
just see shows. Uh we don't know how
many of those robot wolves that they
displayed at the parade, but I've seen
some videos on Twitter. They look pretty
good. And I've seen some other things.
And you know, it would not be crazy. I
would surmise that they are decent on
the inside. But what do I know? And I I
genuinely think that everyone in all
realms, including when we're thinking
about the US, should be on guard for the
fact that we're bombarded in propaganda
these days to an incredible degree.
>> Maybe we should go back to carrier
pigeons.
>> I like that idea.
>> Yeah. So do I. Okay. Shall we leave it
there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the
AllThoughts podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway.
You can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Wisenthal. You can follow me
at the stalwart. Follow our guest Kelly
Grio. She's ka griico. Follow our
producers Carmen Rodriguez at karman
armano Bennett at Dashbot and Kalebrooks
at Kalebrooks. For more OddLotss
content, go to bloomberg.com/odddlots
where the daily newsletter and all of
our episodes. And you can chat about all
of these things 247 in our Discord
channel. We even have a defense channel
on there. discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you like it
when Joe fulfills his destiny as a
middle-aged man and talks about the
defense industry, then please leave us a
positive review on your favorite podcast
platform. And remember, if you are a
Bloomberg subscriber, you can listen to
all of our episodes absolutely adree.
All you need to do is find the Bloomberg
channel on Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]